---
layout:     post
title:      DConf Overview
date:       2015-01-05 12:00:00
summary:    An overview of how to use DConf configuration on python and qml.
tags: sailfishos python dconf configuration mer-plugin
---

## DConf

Links:
* [Dconf overview - gnome](https://developer.gnome.org/dconf/unstable/dconf-overview.html)
* [Dconf mer-package](https://github.com/mer-packages/dconf)
* [Using GSettings with Python/PyGObject](http://www.micahcarrick.com/gsettings-python-gnome-3.html)
* [Gio.Settings documentation](http://lazka.github.io/pgi-docs/#Gio-2.0/classes/Settings.html)
* [GSettings C Documentation](https://developer.gnome.org/gio/stable/GSettings.html)


dconf is a simple key/value storage system. dconf has a partial client/server architecture. It uses D-Bus. The server is only involved in writes (and is not activated in the user session until the user modifies a preference). The list of paths that each process is watching is stored within the D-Bus daemon itself (as D-Bus signal match rules).

A profile is a list of configuration databases that dconf consults to find the value for a key. The user's personal database always takes the highest priority, followed by the system databases in the order prescribed by the profile. Profile file is stored in `/etc/dconf/profile/user`. It defines 3 databases:
* A read only system database called "nemo" which is used to store configuration for packages coming from nemo. (`/etc/dconf/db/nemo`)
* A read only system database called "vendor". This allows vendors to override and customize stuff. (`/etc/dconf/db/vendor`)
    An example is the theme. Nemo has its theme and the nemo database contains the name of it.
    A vendor (like Jolla can override it with its own theme and store that info in the vendor db).
* A read/write db called user which contains the configuration (`/home/nemo/.config/dconf/user`)


### Adding an app

According to [mer](https://github.com/mer-packages/dconf). But, [harbour doesn't allow this](https://harbour.jolla.com/faq#2.1.0)

1. Create a key file with your defaults in `/etc/dconf/db/nemo.d/<package-name>.txt`:

    [apps/harbour-my-nice-app]
    miValue='a value'
    anotherValue=1
    boolValue=false

2. Call `dconf-update` via a `oneshot` (`%{_bindir}/add-oneshot dconf-update`) in `%post`.

### dconf command line utility

    [nemo@SailfishEmul ~]$ dconf help
    Usage:
      dconf COMMAND [ARGS...]
    
    Commands:
      help              Show this information
      read              Read the value of a key
      list              List the contents of a dir
      write             Change the value of a key
      reset             Reset the value of a key or dir
      update            Update the system databases
      watch             Watch a path for changes
      dump              Dump an entire subpath to stdout
      load              Populate a subpath from stdin


### Using dconf in python through GSettings

This is only intended if you are developing a python app which [is allowed in harbour](https://harbour.jolla.com/faq#8.1.0). 

In Qt/C++ you are encorage to use the MGConfItem provided by the [nemomobile/mlite package](https://github.com/nemomobile/mlite/), and in qml the [nemomobile/configuration qml plugin](https://github.com/nemomobile/nemo-qml-plugin-configuration/), although it has not been harbour-whitelisted). The problem of using python is that there are not bindings. The work arround is using `GSettings` of the `gi.repository` packages which uses `dconf` as backend.

In order to use `GSettings` a configuration schema has to be declared and compiled.

1. Generate `<app>.gschema.xml` -> `/usr/share/glib-2.0/schemas/`

Harbour doesn't allow to write files in `/usr/share/glib-2.0/schemas`. If targeting harbour, a workaround could be writing the file in `/usr/share/<HARBOUR_APP_NAME>` compile the file, and in runtime change `XDG_DATA_DIRS` in order to make `GSettings` to look for the custom schema.

`id` is the schema id, while `path` is the dconf key.

    <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
    <schemalist>
      <schema id="apps.harbour-my-nice-app" path="/apps/harbour-my-nice-app/">
        <key type="s" name="miValue">
          <default>'a value'</default>
          <summary>My string value</summary>
          <description>This is an example of a string setting.</description>
        </key>
        <key type="i" name="anotherValue">
          <default>1</default>
          <summary>My number value</summary>
          <description>This is an example of a number setting.</description>
        </key>
        <key type="b" name="boolValue">
          <default>false</default>
          <summary>My bool value</summary>
          <description>This is an example of a bool setting.</description>
        </key>
      </schema>
    </schemalist>

2. Compile Schemas

    [root@SailfishEmul ~]# glib-compile-schemas /usr/share/glib-2.0/schemas/

3. Example code:

    from gi.repository import Gio
    
    if __name__ == "__main__":
        gsettings = Gio.Settings.new("apps.harbour-my-nice-app")
        print(gsettings.get_string("miValue"))
        gsettings.set_string("miValue", "another value")
        gsettings.apply()

See the [Gio.Settings documentation](http://lazka.github.io/pgi-docs/#Gio-2.0/classes/Settings.html) for full information about how to set/get values. Remember that if you change values, `.apply()` method must be called!.

You can check that both the python script and `dconf read` command utility return the same values for the same paths.

### Using dconf in QML `org.nemomobile.configuration`

[nemomobile/nemo-qml-plugin-configuration](https://github.com/nemomobile/nemo-qml-plugin-configuration/)

TODO:
